docs/user-guide/spark-catalogs/enterprise.md, before:

---
title: Enterprise Catalog
sidebar_label: Enterprise Catalog
description:
  Configure and manage Enterprise Catalogs in IOMETE — a format-agnostic catalog
  supporting Avro, CSV, Iceberg, JSON, ORC, Parquet, and Text tables.
last_update:
  date: 02/07/2026
  author: Rocco Verhoef
---

import Img from '@site/src/components/Img';

:::warning Preview Feature

Enterprise Catalog is a **preview feature** introduced in IOMETE v3.16.0. It is
intended for evaluation and feedback — **not for production use**.

- Breaking changes may occur before general availability
- Please share your feedback with your IOMETE representative or
  [open a ticket](https://iomete.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portals) on
  our support portal

:::

## Overview

Enterprise Catalog is a format-agnostic data catalog that supports **Avro**,
**CSV**, **Iceberg**, **JSON**, **ORC**, **Parquet**, and **Text** tables — with
**Delta Lake** and **Hudi** support planned.

Traditional Spark setups rely on `spark_catalog` (the session catalog) which
uses **Hive Metastore** underneath. While Hive Metastore supports multiple
formats, it has significant limitations:

- **Single namespace** — All multi-format tables live in `spark_catalog`; you
  cannot create additional multi-format catalogs
- **Legacy technology** — Hive Metastore is aging infrastructure with known
  security vulnerabilities and performance bottlenecks
- **Suboptimal Iceberg support** — Forces users to create separate Iceberg REST
  Catalogs, fragmenting table management
- **Scalability constraints** — Performance degrades significantly with large
  table counts

Enterprise Catalog addresses these limitations by:

- **Multiple catalog instances** — Create as many multi-format catalogs as
  needed, each with isolated namespaces
- **Modern architecture** — Built on top of Iceberg REST Catalog with
  format-agnostic design, eliminating Hive Metastore dependencies
- **Format unification** — Manage Iceberg tables alongside flat files (Parquet,
  JSON, CSV, etc.) in a single catalog
- **Auto-configuration** — Simplified setup requiring only name and warehouse;
  connection properties and internal routing configured automatically

Enterprise Catalog is currently only accessible by IOMETE workloads: Lakehouses,
Spark jobs, and Jupyter notebooks.

## Architecture

Enterprise Catalog is built as a **wrapper on top of
[Iceberg REST Catalog](./internal.md)**:

- For **Iceberg tables**, it delegates to the underlying Iceberg REST Catalog
  infrastructure
- For **other formats** (Avro, CSV, JSON, ORC, Parquet, Text), it extends the
  catalog to register and query these formats alongside Iceberg tables
- Connection properties (REST endpoint, storage type, internal routing) are
  **auto-configured** — no manual S3 credentials or endpoint configuration
  required

This architecture means Enterprise Catalog inherits the reliability of Iceberg
REST Catalog while extending format support beyond Iceberg. It currently uses
the Spark Catalog V1 API, with V2 migration planned for a future release.

## Supported Formats

| Format     | Status       |
| ---------- | ------------ |
| Avro       | ✅ Available |
| CSV        | ✅ Available |
| Iceberg    | ✅ Available |
| JSON       | ✅ Available |
| ORC        | ✅ Available |
| Parquet    | ✅ Available |
| Text       | ✅ Available |
| Delta Lake | 🔜 Planned   |
| Hudi       | 🔜 Planned   |

## Creating an Enterprise Catalog

On the admin portal, locate **Spark Catalogs** on the sidebar (under **Data
Governance**) and click **+ New Spark Catalog**.

Select **Enterprise Catalog** from the **Managed Catalogs** section.

<Img src="/img/user-guide/spark-catalogs/enterprise-catalog-create.png" alt="Enterprise Catalog creation form" maxWidth="600px" />

Provide the following:

- **Name** — A unique name for the catalog
- **Warehouse** — The S3-compatible warehouse URL for table storage

Basic settings are automatically configured by the platform — you only need to
provide overrides, if any.

### Validating and Saving

Click **Test Connection** to validate connectivity and permissions, then click
**Create**.

<Img src="/img/user-guide/spark-catalogs/enterprise-catalog-test-connection.png" alt="Enterprise Catalog test connection" maxWidth="600px" />

Due to caching, the catalog might take a few seconds to become available in the
platform and on applications.

---

## Current Features

- **Multi-format read/write** — Avro, CSV, Iceberg, JSON, ORC, Parquet, and Text
  tables in a single catalog
- **Auto-configured connections** — REST endpoint, storage type, and internal
  routing require no manual setup
- **Simplified creation** — Only name and warehouse required; no S3 credentials
  needed
- **IOMETE workload access** — Available to Lakehouses, Spark jobs, and Jupyter
  notebooks

## Planned Features

The following capabilities are under development for future releases:

- **Spark Catalog V2 API migration** — Currently uses V1 API; V2 will enable
  richer catalog operations
- **External REST API access** — Expose catalogs to external compute engines
  with token-based authentication
- **Namespace & table-level ACLs** — GRANT/REVOKE permissions via Data Security
- **JDBC/ODBC discovery** — Register catalogs for BI tool auto-discovery
- **Hive Metastore migration utility** — Migrate existing Hive-managed tables
  into Enterprise Catalog
- **Delta Lake & Hudi support** — Extend format coverage to include Delta Lake
  and Hudi tables
- **Column-level lineage & tags** — Track data flow and annotate columns with
  metadata
- **Fine-grained privileges** — Column-level access, row filters, and data
  masking

---

## Catalog Comparison

|                        | `spark_catalog` (Hive Metastore)                               | Enterprise Catalog                                                             | Iceberg REST Catalog                                                |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Formats**            | Avro, CSV, JSON, ORC, Parquet, Text.<br/> Iceberg (suboptimal) | Avro, CSV, JSON, ORC, Parquet, Text, Iceberg.<br/> Delta Lake & Hudi (planned) | Iceberg only                                                        |
| **Multiple instances** | ❌ Single session catalog only                                 | ✅ Create multiple catalogs                                                    | ✅ Create multiple catalogs                                         |
| **Architecture**       | Legacy (Hive Metastore)                                        | Modern (Iceberg REST-based)                                                    | Modern (Iceberg REST)                                               |
| **Setup**              | Pre-configured                                                 | Auto-configured (name + warehouse only)                                        | Auto-configured when internal; manual S3 config for external access |
| **External access**    | N/A (session catalog only)                                     | Planned — currently internal only                                              | REST API with token authentication                                  |
| **Access delegation**  | N/A                                                            | Planned                                                                        | Credential vending & remote signing                                 |
| **Status**             | Production (legacy)                                            | Preview                                                                        | Production-ready                                                    |

---

## Providing Feedback

Enterprise Catalog is in **preview** and we actively encourage you to try it
out. Your feedback directly shapes its development — every issue reported,
feature requested, or workflow shared helps us build a better product.

- Contact your **IOMETE representative** with questions, ideas, or issues
- [Open a ticket](https://iomete.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portals) on
  our support portal for technical support

Commit message:

docs(enterprise-catalog): add Known Issues section with CSV and external table limitations

docs/user-guide/spark-catalogs/enterprise.md, after:

---
title: Enterprise Catalog
sidebar_label: Enterprise Catalog
description:
  Configure and manage Enterprise Catalogs in IOMETE — a format-agnostic catalog
  supporting Avro, CSV, Iceberg, JSON, ORC, Parquet, and Text tables.
last_update:
  date: 02/07/2026
  author: Rocco Verhoef
---

import Img from '@site/src/components/Img';

:::warning Preview Feature

Enterprise Catalog is a **preview feature** introduced in IOMETE v3.16.0. It is
intended for evaluation and feedback — **not for production use**.

- Breaking changes may occur before general availability
- Please share your feedback with your IOMETE representative or
  [open a ticket](https://iomete.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portals) on
  our support portal

:::

## Overview

Enterprise Catalog is a format-agnostic data catalog that supports **Avro**,
**CSV**, **Iceberg**, **JSON**, **ORC**, **Parquet**, and **Text** tables — with
**Delta Lake** and **Hudi** support planned.

Traditional Spark setups rely on `spark_catalog` (the session catalog) which
uses **Hive Metastore** underneath. While Hive Metastore supports multiple
formats, it has significant limitations:

- **Single namespace** — All multi-format tables live in `spark_catalog`; you
  cannot create additional multi-format catalogs
- **Legacy technology** — Hive Metastore is aging infrastructure with known
  security vulnerabilities and performance bottlenecks
- **Suboptimal Iceberg support** — Forces users to create separate Iceberg REST
  Catalogs, fragmenting table management
- **Scalability constraints** — Performance degrades significantly with large
  table counts

Enterprise Catalog addresses these limitations by:

- **Multiple catalog instances** — Create as many multi-format catalogs as
  needed, each with isolated namespaces
- **Modern architecture** — Built on top of Iceberg REST Catalog with
  format-agnostic design, eliminating Hive Metastore dependencies
- **Format unification** — Manage Iceberg tables alongside flat files (Parquet,
  JSON, CSV, etc.) in a single catalog
- **Auto-configuration** — Simplified setup requiring only name and warehouse;
  connection properties and internal routing configured automatically

Enterprise Catalog is currently only accessible by IOMETE workloads: Lakehouses,
Spark jobs, and Jupyter notebooks.

## Architecture

Enterprise Catalog is built as a wrapper on top of the
[Iceberg REST Catalog](./internal.md):

- For **Iceberg tables**, it delegates to the underlying Iceberg REST Catalog
  infrastructure
- For **other formats** (Avro, CSV, JSON, ORC, Parquet, Text), it extends the
  catalog to register and query these formats alongside Iceberg tables
- Connection properties (REST endpoint, storage type, internal routing) are
  **auto-configured** — no manual S3 credentials or endpoint configuration
  required

This architecture means Enterprise Catalog inherits the reliability of Iceberg
REST Catalog while extending format support beyond Iceberg. It currently uses
the Spark Catalog V1 API, with V2 migration planned for a future release.

## Supported Formats

| Format     | Status       |
| ---------- | ------------ |
| Avro       | ✅ Available |
| CSV        | ✅ Available |
| Iceberg    | ✅ Available |
| JSON       | ✅ Available |
| ORC        | ✅ Available |
| Parquet    | ✅ Available |
| Text       | ✅ Available |
| Delta Lake | 🔜 Planned   |
| Hudi       | 🔜 Planned   |

## Creating an Enterprise Catalog

On the admin portal, locate **Spark Catalogs** on the sidebar (under **Data
Governance**) and click **+ New Spark Catalog**.

Select **Enterprise Catalog** from the **Managed Catalogs** section.

<Img src="/img/user-guide/spark-catalogs/enterprise-catalog-create.png" alt="Enterprise Catalog creation form" maxWidth="600px" />

Provide the following:

- **Name** — A unique name for the catalog
- **Warehouse** — The S3-compatible warehouse URL for table storage

All other settings are automatically configured by the platform. Any values provided are treated as overrides — none are required.

### Validating and Saving

Click **Test Connection** to validate connectivity and permissions, then click
**Create**.

<Img src="/img/user-guide/spark-catalogs/enterprise-catalog-test-connection.png" alt="Enterprise Catalog test connection" maxWidth="600px" />

Due to caching, the catalog might take a few seconds to become available in the
platform and on applications.

---

## Current Features

- **Multi-format read/write** — Avro, CSV, Iceberg, JSON, ORC, Parquet, and Text
  tables in a single catalog
- **Auto-configured connections** — REST endpoint, storage type, and internal
  routing require no manual setup
- **Simplified creation** — Only name and warehouse required; no S3 credentials
  needed
- **IOMETE workload access** — Available to Lakehouses, Spark jobs, and Jupyter
  notebooks

## Known Issues

The following issues are present in the current preview release and will be addressed in future releases:

- **CSV table queries fail when `TBLPROPERTIES` collide with CSV option names** — Providing table properties whose keys match CSV datasource option names causes queries to fail. For example, `TBLPROPERTIES ('comment' = 'table description')` produces `comment cannot be more than one character`. This happens because all `TBLPROPERTIES` are forwarded to the CSV datasource layer. Avoid setting properties whose keys match CSV option names — including `comment`, `sep`, `quote`, `escape`, `header`, and `multiLine` — until this is resolved.
- **Non-Iceberg tables are treated as external tables** — Regardless of how a table is created, all non-Iceberg tables are treated as external. This has the following implications:
  - `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `MERGE`, `TRUNCATE` — These operations are not supported on non-Iceberg tables
  - `PURGE` — Dropping a table does not delete the underlying data files from storage
  - Table lifecycle behavior may differ from what is expected for managed tables

These are known limitations under active development. If you encounter additional issues, please [open a ticket](https://iomete.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portals) on our support portal or contact your IOMETE representative.

---

## Planned Features

The following capabilities are under development for future releases:

- **Spark Catalog V2 API migration** — Currently uses V1 API; V2 will enable
  richer catalog operations
- **External REST API access** — Expose catalogs to external compute engines
  with token-based authentication
- **Namespace & table-level ACLs** — GRANT/REVOKE permissions via Data Security
- **JDBC/ODBC discovery** — Register catalogs for BI tool auto-discovery
- **Hive Metastore migration utility** — Migrate existing Hive-managed tables
  into Enterprise Catalog
- **Delta Lake & Hudi support** — Extend format coverage to include Delta Lake
  and Hudi tables
- **Column-level lineage & tags** — Track data flow and annotate columns with
  metadata
- **Fine-grained privileges** — Column-level access, row filters, and data
  masking

---

## Catalog Comparison

|                        | `spark_catalog` (Hive Metastore)                               | Enterprise Catalog                                                             | Iceberg REST Catalog                                                |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Formats**            | Avro, CSV, JSON, ORC, Parquet, Text.<br/> Iceberg (suboptimal) | Avro, CSV, JSON, ORC, Parquet, Text, Iceberg.<br/> Delta Lake & Hudi (planned) | Iceberg only                                                        |
| **Multiple instances** | ❌ Single session catalog only                                 | ✅ Create multiple catalogs                                                    | ✅ Create multiple catalogs                                         |
| **Architecture**       | Legacy (Hive Metastore)                                        | Modern (Iceberg REST-based)                                                    | Modern (Iceberg REST)                                               |
| **Setup**              | Pre-configured                                                 | Auto-configured (name + warehouse only)                                        | Auto-configured when internal; manual S3 config for external access |
| **External access**    | N/A (session catalog only)                                     | Planned — currently internal only                                              | REST API with token authentication                                  |
| **Access delegation**  | N/A                                                            | Planned                                                                        | Credential vending & remote signing                                 |
| **Status**             | Production (legacy)                                            | Preview                                                                        | Production-ready                                                    |

---

## Providing Feedback

Enterprise Catalog is in **preview** and we actively encourage you to try it
out. Your feedback directly shapes its development — every issue reported,
feature requested, or workflow shared helps us build a better product.

- Contact your **IOMETE representative** with questions, ideas, or issues
- [Open a ticket](https://iomete.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portals) on
  our support portal for technical support
