docs/iceberg-tables/getting-started.mdx, before:

---
title: Getting Started
last_update:
  date: 09/30/2022
  author: Vugar Dadalov
---

<!-- <head>
  <title>Iceberg tables</title>
  <meta
    name="description"
    content="Iceberg tables"
  />
</head> -->

**iomete** uses [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org/) as a compute engine, with [Apache Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/) provider with additional optimization and packaging.
___

## Apache Iceberg

Apache Iceberg is an open table format for huge analytic datasets. It provides a rich feature set:

  * ACID transactions and insert/merge/delete
  * [Schema evolution](https://iceberg.apache.org/evolution#schema-evolution) supports add, drop, update, or rename, and has [no side-effects](https://iceberg.apache.org/evolution#correctness)
  * [Hidden partitioning](https://iceberg.apache.org/partitioning) prevents user mistakes that cause silently incorrect results or extremely slow queries
  * [Partition layout evolution](https://iceberg.apache.org/evolution#partition-evolution) can update the layout of a table as data volume or query patterns change
  * [Time travel](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-queries#time-travelr) enables reproducible queries that use exactly the same table snapshot, or lets users easily examine changes
  * Version rollback allows users to quickly correct problems by resetting tables to a good state


:::info
Iceberg is the default provider. That means the followings have the same effect:
- `create table test1(id string);`
- `create table test1(id string) using icerberg;`
:::

<br/>

### Creating a table

```sql
CREATE TABLE table1 (id bigint, data string);
```

Iceberg supports the full range of SQL DDL commands, including:
   
  * [CREATE TABLE ... PARTITIONED BY](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#create-table)
  * [CREATE TABLE ... AS SELECT](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#create-table-as-select)
  * [ALTER TABLE](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#alter-table)
  * [DROP TABLE](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#drop-table)

<br/>

### Writing
Once your table is created, insert data using [INSERT INTO:](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-writes/#insert-into)
```sql
INSERT INTO table1 VALUES (1, 'a'), (2, 'b'), (3, 'c');
INSERT INTO table1 SELECT id, data FROM source WHERE length(data) = 1;
``` 

Row-level SQL updates using [MERGE INTO](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-writes/#merge-into) and [DELETE FROM](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/spark-writes/):

```sql
MERGE INTO local.db.target t USING (SELECT * FROM updates) u ON t.id = u.id
WHEN MATCHED THEN UPDATE SET t.count = t.count + u.count
WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN INSERT *
```
<br/>

### Reading

```sql
SELECT count(1) as count, data
FROM table1
GROUP BY data
```

To view all of the snapshots in a table, use the `snapshots` metadata table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM default.table1.snapshots
```


| committed_at            | snapshot_id     | parent_id | operation  | manifest_list                                      |
| ----------------------- | --------------- | --------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | 57897183625154  | null      | append     | s3://.../table/metadata/snap-57897183625154-1.avro |
| ...                     | ...             | ...       | ...        | ...                                                |

Commit message:

intro and iceberg tables meta tags and titles

docs/iceberg-tables/getting-started.mdx, after:

---
title: Iceberg tables getting started 
description: starting Apache Spark as a compute engine, with Apache Iceberg provider with additional optimization and packaging
last_update:
  date: 09/30/2022
  author: Vugar Dadalov
---

<!-- <head>
  <title>Iceberg tables</title>
  <meta
    name="description"
    content="Iceberg tables"
  />
</head> -->

**iomete** uses [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org/) as a compute engine, with [Apache Iceberg](https://iceberg.apache.org/) provider with additional optimization and packaging.
___

## Apache Iceberg

Apache Iceberg is an open table format for huge analytic datasets. It provides a rich feature set:

  * ACID transactions and insert/merge/delete
  * [Schema evolution](https://iceberg.apache.org/evolution#schema-evolution) supports add, drop, update, or rename, and has [no side-effects](https://iceberg.apache.org/evolution#correctness)
  * [Hidden partitioning](https://iceberg.apache.org/partitioning) prevents user mistakes that cause silently incorrect results or extremely slow queries
  * [Partition layout evolution](https://iceberg.apache.org/evolution#partition-evolution) can update the layout of a table as data volume or query patterns change
  * [Time travel](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-queries#time-travelr) enables reproducible queries that use exactly the same table snapshot, or lets users easily examine changes
  * Version rollback allows users to quickly correct problems by resetting tables to a good state


:::info
Iceberg is the default provider. That means the followings have the same effect:
- `create table test1(id string);`
- `create table test1(id string) using icerberg;`
:::

<br/>

### Creating a table

```sql
CREATE TABLE table1 (id bigint, data string);
```

Iceberg supports the full range of SQL DDL commands, including:
   
  * [CREATE TABLE ... PARTITIONED BY](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#create-table)
  * [CREATE TABLE ... AS SELECT](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#create-table-as-select)
  * [ALTER TABLE](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#alter-table)
  * [DROP TABLE](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-ddl/#drop-table)

<br/>

### Writing
Once your table is created, insert data using [INSERT INTO:](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-writes/#insert-into)
```sql
INSERT INTO table1 VALUES (1, 'a'), (2, 'b'), (3, 'c');
INSERT INTO table1 SELECT id, data FROM source WHERE length(data) = 1;
``` 

Row-level SQL updates using [MERGE INTO](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-writes/#merge-into) and [DELETE FROM](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/spark-writes/):

```sql
MERGE INTO local.db.target t USING (SELECT * FROM updates) u ON t.id = u.id
WHEN MATCHED THEN UPDATE SET t.count = t.count + u.count
WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN INSERT *
```
<br/>

### Reading

```sql
SELECT count(1) as count, data
FROM table1
GROUP BY data
```

To view all of the snapshots in a table, use the `snapshots` metadata table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM default.table1.snapshots
```


| committed_at            | snapshot_id     | parent_id | operation  | manifest_list                                      |
| ----------------------- | --------------- | --------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | 57897183625154  | null      | append     | s3://.../table/metadata/snap-57897183625154-1.avro |
| ...                     | ...             | ...       | ...        | ...                                                |
