docs/iceberg-tables/queries.mdx, before:

---
title: Queries
last_update:
  date: 10/04/2022
  author: Vugar Dadalov
---

<!-- <head>
  <title>Iceberg tables queries</title>
  <meta
    name="description"
    content="Iceberg tables query"
  />
</head> -->

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1 -- database: db, table: table1
```

Metadata tables, like `history` and `snapshots`, can use the Iceberg table name as a namespace.  
For example, to read from the `files` metadata table for `prod.db.table`, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1.files
```

<br/>

### Time travel

To select a specific table snapshot or the snapshot at some time, Iceberg supports two Spark read options:

- `snapshot-id` selects a specific table snapshot
- `as-of-timestamp` selects the current snapshot at a timestamp, in milliseconds

```scala
// time travel to October 26, 1986 at 01:21:00
spark.read
    .option("as-of-timestamp", "499162860000")
    .format("iceberg")
    .load("path/to/table")
```

```scala
// time travel to snapshot with ID 10963874102873L
spark.read
    .option("snapshot-id", 10963874102873L)
    .format("iceberg")
    .load("path/to/table")
```

:::info 
Time travel is not yet supported by Spark’s SQL syntax.
:::

<br/>


### Inspecting tables

To inspect a table’s history, snapshots, and other metadata, Iceberg supports metadata tables.

Metadata tables are identified by adding the metadata table name after the original table name. For example, history for `db.table1` is read using `db.table1.history`.

### History

To show table history, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1.history
```

```
+-------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| made_current_at         | snapshot_id         | parent_id           | is_current_ancestor |
+-------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | 5781947118336215154 | NULL                | true                |
| 2019-02-08 03:47:55.948 | 5179299526185056830 | 5781947118336215154 | true                |
| 2019-02-09 16:24:30.13  | 296410040247533544  | 5179299526185056830 | false               |
| 2019-02-09 16:32:47.336 | 2999875608062437330 | 5179299526185056830 | true                |
| 2019-02-09 19:42:03.919 | 8924558786060583479 | 2999875608062437330 | true                |
| 2019-02-09 19:49:16.343 | 6536733823181975045 | 8924558786060583479 | true                |
+-------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
```

:::info 
**This shows a commit that was rolled back.** The example has two snapshots with the same parent, and one is not an ancestor of the current table state.
:::

<br/>

### Snapshots

To show the valid snapshots for a table, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1.snapshots
```

```
+-------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| committed_at            | snapshot_id    | parent_id | operation | manifest_list                                      | summary                                               |
+-------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | 57897183625154 | null      | append    | s3://.../table1/metadata/snap-5789718362515-1.avro | { added-records -> 2478404, total-records -> 2478404, |
|                         |                |           |           |                                                    |   added-data-files -> 438, total-data-files -> 438,   |
|                         |                |           |           |                                                    |   spark.app.id -> application_1520379288616_155055 }  |
| ...                     | ...            | ...       | ...       | ...                                                | ...                                                   |
+-------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
```

You can also join snapshots to table history. For example, this query will show table history, with the application ID that wrote each snapshot:

```sql
select
    h.made_current_at,
    s.operation,
    h.snapshot_id,
    h.is_current_ancestor,
    s.summary['spark.app.id']
from db.table.history h
join db.table.snapshots s
  on h.snapshot_id = s.snapshot_id
order by made_current_at
```

```
+-------------------------+-----------+----------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| made_current_at         | operation | snapshot_id    | is_current_ancestor | summary[spark.app.id]            |
+-------------------------+-----------+----------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | append    | 57897183625154 | true                | application_1520379288616_155055 |
| 2019-02-09 16:24:30.13  | delete    | 29641004024753 | false               | application_1520379288616_151109 |
| 2019-02-09 16:32:47.336 | append    | 57897183625154 | true                | application_1520379288616_155055 |
| 2019-02-08 03:47:55.948 | overwrite | 51792995261850 | true                | application_1520379288616_152431 |
+-------------------------+-----------+----------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
```

<br/>

### Files

To show a table’s data files and each file’s metadata, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table.files
```

```
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------------+------------------+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------+
| file_path                                                               | file_format | record_count | file_size_in_bytes | column_sizes       | value_counts     | null_value_counts | nan_value_counts | lower_bounds    | upper_bounds    | key_metadata | split_offsets |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------------+------------------+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------+
| s3:/.../table/data/00000-3-8d6d60e8-d427-4809-bcf0-f5d45a4aad96.parquet | PARQUET     | 1            | 597                | [1 -> 90, 2 -> 62] | [1 -> 1, 2 -> 1] | [1 -> 0, 2 -> 0]  | []               | [1 -> , 2 -> c] | [1 -> , 2 -> c] | null         | [4]           |
| s3:/.../table/data/00001-4-8d6d60e8-d427-4809-bcf0-f5d45a4aad96.parquet | PARQUET     | 1            | 597                | [1 -> 90, 2 -> 62] | [1 -> 1, 2 -> 1] | [1 -> 0, 2 -> 0]  | []               | [1 -> , 2 -> b] | [1 -> , 2 -> b] | null         | [4]           |
| s3:/.../table/data/00002-5-8d6d60e8-d427-4809-bcf0-f5d45a4aad96.parquet | PARQUET     | 1            | 597                | [1 -> 90, 2 -> 62] | [1 -> 1, 2 -> 1] | [1 -> 0, 2 -> 0]  | []               | [1 -> , 2 -> a] | [1 -> , 2 -> a] | null         | [4]           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------------+------------------+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------+
```

<br/>

### Manifests

To show a table’s file manifests and each file’s metadata, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table.manifests
```

```
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+---------------------+------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| path                                                                 | length | partition_spec_id | added_snapshot_id   | added_data_files_count | existing_data_files_count | deleted_data_files_count | partition_summaries                  |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+---------------------+------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| s3://.../table/metadata/45b5290b-ee61-4788-b324-b1e2735c0e10-m0.avro | 4479   | 0                 | 6668963634911763636 | 8                      | 0                         | 0                        | [[false,null,2019-05-13,2019-05-15]] |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+---------------------+------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
```

:::info
1. Fields within partition_summaries column of the manifests table correspond to field_summary structs within [manifest list](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#manifest-lists), with the following order: - contains_null - contains_nan - lower_bound - upper_bound 
2. contains_nan could return null, which indicates that this information is not available from files’ metadata
:::

Commit message:

intro and iceberg tables meta tags and titles

docs/iceberg-tables/queries.mdx, after:

---
title: Queries
description: Metadata tables such as `history` and `snapshots`, can use the Iceberg table name as a namespace
last_update:
  date: 10/04/2022
  author: Vugar Dadalov
---

<!-- <head>
  <title>Iceberg tables queries</title>
  <meta
    name="description"
    content="Iceberg tables query"
  />
</head> -->

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1 -- database: db, table: table1
```

Metadata tables, like `history` and `snapshots`, can use the Iceberg table name as a namespace.  
For example, to read from the `files` metadata table for `prod.db.table`, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1.files
```

<br/>

### Time travel

To select a specific table snapshot or the snapshot at some time, Iceberg supports two Spark read options:

- `snapshot-id` selects a specific table snapshot
- `as-of-timestamp` selects the current snapshot at a timestamp, in milliseconds

```scala
// time travel to October 26, 1986 at 01:21:00
spark.read
    .option("as-of-timestamp", "499162860000")
    .format("iceberg")
    .load("path/to/table")
```

```scala
// time travel to snapshot with ID 10963874102873L
spark.read
    .option("snapshot-id", 10963874102873L)
    .format("iceberg")
    .load("path/to/table")
```

:::info 
Time travel is not yet supported by Spark’s SQL syntax.
:::

<br/>


### Inspecting tables

To inspect a table’s history, snapshots, and other metadata, Iceberg supports metadata tables.

Metadata tables are identified by adding the metadata table name after the original table name. For example, history for `db.table1` is read using `db.table1.history`.

### History

To show table history, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1.history
```

```
+-------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| made_current_at         | snapshot_id         | parent_id           | is_current_ancestor |
+-------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | 5781947118336215154 | NULL                | true                |
| 2019-02-08 03:47:55.948 | 5179299526185056830 | 5781947118336215154 | true                |
| 2019-02-09 16:24:30.13  | 296410040247533544  | 5179299526185056830 | false               |
| 2019-02-09 16:32:47.336 | 2999875608062437330 | 5179299526185056830 | true                |
| 2019-02-09 19:42:03.919 | 8924558786060583479 | 2999875608062437330 | true                |
| 2019-02-09 19:49:16.343 | 6536733823181975045 | 8924558786060583479 | true                |
+-------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
```

:::info 
**This shows a commit that was rolled back.** The example has two snapshots with the same parent, and one is not an ancestor of the current table state.
:::

<br/>

### Snapshots

To show the valid snapshots for a table, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table1.snapshots
```

```
+-------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| committed_at            | snapshot_id    | parent_id | operation | manifest_list                                      | summary                                               |
+-------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | 57897183625154 | null      | append    | s3://.../table1/metadata/snap-5789718362515-1.avro | { added-records -> 2478404, total-records -> 2478404, |
|                         |                |           |           |                                                    |   added-data-files -> 438, total-data-files -> 438,   |
|                         |                |           |           |                                                    |   spark.app.id -> application_1520379288616_155055 }  |
| ...                     | ...            | ...       | ...       | ...                                                | ...                                                   |
+-------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
```

You can also join snapshots to table history. For example, this query will show table history, with the application ID that wrote each snapshot:

```sql
select
    h.made_current_at,
    s.operation,
    h.snapshot_id,
    h.is_current_ancestor,
    s.summary['spark.app.id']
from db.table.history h
join db.table.snapshots s
  on h.snapshot_id = s.snapshot_id
order by made_current_at
```

```
+-------------------------+-----------+----------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| made_current_at         | operation | snapshot_id    | is_current_ancestor | summary[spark.app.id]            |
+-------------------------+-----------+----------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2019-02-08 03:29:51.215 | append    | 57897183625154 | true                | application_1520379288616_155055 |
| 2019-02-09 16:24:30.13  | delete    | 29641004024753 | false               | application_1520379288616_151109 |
| 2019-02-09 16:32:47.336 | append    | 57897183625154 | true                | application_1520379288616_155055 |
| 2019-02-08 03:47:55.948 | overwrite | 51792995261850 | true                | application_1520379288616_152431 |
+-------------------------+-----------+----------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
```

<br/>

### Files

To show a table’s data files and each file’s metadata, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table.files
```

```
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------------+------------------+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------+
| file_path                                                               | file_format | record_count | file_size_in_bytes | column_sizes       | value_counts     | null_value_counts | nan_value_counts | lower_bounds    | upper_bounds    | key_metadata | split_offsets |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------------+------------------+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------+
| s3:/.../table/data/00000-3-8d6d60e8-d427-4809-bcf0-f5d45a4aad96.parquet | PARQUET     | 1            | 597                | [1 -> 90, 2 -> 62] | [1 -> 1, 2 -> 1] | [1 -> 0, 2 -> 0]  | []               | [1 -> , 2 -> c] | [1 -> , 2 -> c] | null         | [4]           |
| s3:/.../table/data/00001-4-8d6d60e8-d427-4809-bcf0-f5d45a4aad96.parquet | PARQUET     | 1            | 597                | [1 -> 90, 2 -> 62] | [1 -> 1, 2 -> 1] | [1 -> 0, 2 -> 0]  | []               | [1 -> , 2 -> b] | [1 -> , 2 -> b] | null         | [4]           |
| s3:/.../table/data/00002-5-8d6d60e8-d427-4809-bcf0-f5d45a4aad96.parquet | PARQUET     | 1            | 597                | [1 -> 90, 2 -> 62] | [1 -> 1, 2 -> 1] | [1 -> 0, 2 -> 0]  | []               | [1 -> , 2 -> a] | [1 -> , 2 -> a] | null         | [4]           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------------+------------------+-------------------+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------+
```

<br/>

### Manifests

To show a table’s file manifests and each file’s metadata, run:

```sql
SELECT * FROM db.table.manifests
```

```
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+---------------------+------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| path                                                                 | length | partition_spec_id | added_snapshot_id   | added_data_files_count | existing_data_files_count | deleted_data_files_count | partition_summaries                  |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+---------------------+------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| s3://.../table/metadata/45b5290b-ee61-4788-b324-b1e2735c0e10-m0.avro | 4479   | 0                 | 6668963634911763636 | 8                      | 0                         | 0                        | [[false,null,2019-05-13,2019-05-15]] |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+---------------------+------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
```

:::info
1. Fields within partition_summaries column of the manifests table correspond to field_summary structs within [manifest list](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#manifest-lists), with the following order: - contains_null - contains_nan - lower_bound - upper_bound 
2. contains_nan could return null, which indicates that this information is not available from files’ metadata
:::
