docs/getting-started/platform-tour.md, before:

---
title: Platform Tour
description: Here you'll find comprehensive guides and documentation to get you up and running with IOMETE quickly and easily
---

import Img from '@site/src/components/Img';

- Modern lakehouse built on top of **Apache Iceberg** and **Apache Spark.**
- Includes:
  - Lakehouse
  - Spark Jobs
  - SQL editor
  - Advanced data catalog
  - Jupyter Notebook

## Lakehouses page

A **virtual lakehouse** is a cluster of compute resources that provide the required resources, such as CPU, memory to perform the querying processing.
Before using the **SQL Editor**, you should create a lakehouse.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/lakehouse-page.png" alt="Lakehouses page"/>

For more details, see [Virtual Lakehouses](/docs/user-guide/virtual-lakehouses.md).

## SQL Editor page

The main components of the SQL Editor are highlighted below:

- **Worksheets** offer a simple method for you to write SQL queries, execute the queries, and see the results.
- **Database explorer** is used to explore your database objects, which includes namespaces, tables, views, and their columns (even complex columns), and partitions.
- **Lakehouse and Namespace selection** are required to execute SQL queries.
- **SQL Editor** is used to write SQL queries using autocomplete feature. IOMETE tracks database objects and suggests them as autocomplete options
- **Query result view** provide executed queries results. You can filter each column in the results and toggle on Charts to visualize the results as graphs.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/sql-editor-page.png" alt="SQL Editor page"/>

For more details, see [SQL Editor](/docs/user-guide/sql-editor.md).

<!-- ## Connect clusters page

A **virtual lakehouse** is a cluster of compute resources that provide the required resources, such as CPU, memory to perform the querying processing.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/connect-cluster.png" alt="Connect clusters page"/> -->

<!-- For more details, see [Connect clusters](/docs/user-guide/virtual-lakehouses.md). -->

## Spark Jobs page

<!--## Data security page

## Data catalog page

## Notebook -->

Commit message:

Platform tour: Spark job page added

docs/getting-started/platform-tour.md, after:

---
title: Platform Tour
description: Here you'll find comprehensive guides and documentation to get you up and running with IOMETE quickly and easily
---

import Img from '@site/src/components/Img';

- Modern lakehouse built on top of **Apache Iceberg** and **Apache Spark.**
- Includes:
  - Lakehouse
  - Spark Jobs
  - SQL editor
  - Advanced data catalog
  - Jupyter Notebook

## Lakehouses page

A **virtual lakehouse** is a cluster of compute resources that provide the required resources, such as CPU, memory to perform the querying processing.
Before using the **SQL Editor**, you should create a lakehouse.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/lakehouse-page.png" alt="Lakehouses page"/>

For more details, see [Virtual Lakehouses](/docs/user-guide/virtual-lakehouses.md)

## SQL Editor page

The main components of the SQL Editor are highlighted below:

- **Worksheets** offer a simple method for you to write SQL queries, execute the queries, and see the results.
- **Database explorer** is used to explore your database objects, which includes namespaces, tables, views, and their columns (even complex columns), and partitions.
- **Lakehouse and Namespace selection** are required to execute SQL queries.
- **SQL Editor** is used to write SQL queries using autocomplete feature. IOMETE tracks database objects and suggests them as autocomplete options
- **Query result view** provide executed queries results. You can filter each column in the results and toggle on Charts to visualize the results as graphs.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/sql-editor-page.png" alt="SQL Editor page"/>

For more details, see [SQL Editor](/docs/user-guide/sql-editor.md)

<!-- ## Connect clusters page

A **virtual lakehouse** is a cluster of compute resources that provide the required resources, such as CPU, memory to perform the querying processing.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/connect-cluster.png" alt="Connect clusters page"/> -->

<!-- For more details, see [Connect clusters](/docs/user-guide/virtual-lakehouses.md). -->

## Spark Jobs page

IOMETE offers [PySpark quickstart template for AWS](https://github.com/iomete/spark-job-template) or [PySpark quickstart template for GCP](https://github.com/iomete/spark-job-template-gcp) helping you kickstart your first Spark Job. Follow the README instructions to use the template, which includes a sample job reading a CSV file from an S3 bucket, applying transformations, and writing the output to an Iceberg Table. Use it as a starting point for your custom jobs.

<Img src="/img/getting-started/platform-tour/spark-jobs-page.png" alt="Spark jobs page"/>

For more details, see [Spark job](/docs/developer-guide/spark-job/getting-started.md)

<!-- ## Data security page -->

<!--## Data catalog page

## Notebook -->
