blog/2025-08-29-cypress-vs-playwright-e2e-testing-guide.md, before:

---
title: Cypress vs Playwright - E2E Testing Best Practices and Migration Guide
description: Complete guide to E2E testing with Cypress and Playwright. Learn smart locator strategies, reduce test flakiness, and choose between code-based vs no-code testing tools
tags2: [Educational, Technical]
coverImage: img/blog/thumbnails/3.png
authors: vugar
---

import Img from '@site/src/components/Img';

## What is E2E Testing?

End-to-End (E2E) testing simulates **real user interactions** to verify that the entire system — frontend, backend, and integrations — works together as expected. For example, an E2E test might log in a user, submit a form, and confirm the result appears correctly.

**Key benefits:**

- **Early bug detection** - Fixing production bugs can be 100x more expensive than catching them during development
- **Code quality improvement** - Writing tests forces developers to think about edge cases and design better interfaces
- **Team confidence** - Comprehensive tests enable fearless refactoring and feature additions

### Example: Modern Login Test in Playwright

```javascript
// playwright-login.spec.js
test("User can login successfully", async ({ page }) => {
  await page.goto("https://app.example.com");

  // Smart locator strategies - semantic HTML and ARIA
  await page.getByLabel("Email").fill("user@example.com");
  await page.getByLabel("Password").fill("password123");
  await page.getByRole("button", { name: "Sign In" }).click();

  // Assert successful login
  await page.getByRole("heading", { name: "Dashboard" }).waitFor();
  await expect(page).toHaveURL(/.*dashboard/);
});
```

---

## Our Journey: Cypress → Playwright at IOMETE

In 2021, we at IOMETE (a modern data lakehouse platform) chose **Cypress** because it was the most popular E2E testing tool with great community support. However, as our platform's complexity grew, we migrated to **Playwright** for better browser support and stability:

**[Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/):**

- ✅ Easy setup, great debugging with time-travel feature
- ❌ Limited browser support (Chrome-family only, no Safari/WebKit)
- ❌ Parallelization requires paid Cypress Cloud or complex setup
- ❌ Tests run inside the browser (can't test multiple tabs/windows)
- ❌ No native mobile testing support

**[Playwright](https://playwright.dev/):**

- ✅ Full browser support (Chrome, Firefox, Safari)
- ✅ Parallel execution, faster CI/CD pipelines
- ✅ Open-source with video recording and trace viewer
- ✅ Smart locator strategies (role, label, text)
- ⚠️ Developer-only tool

**No-Code Alternatives:**

- ✅ AI-powered self-healing selectors
- ✅ Non-technical team members can contribute
- ❌ $200-500/month pricing
- ❌ Limited flexibility for complex scenarios (API mocking, conditional logic, database setup)

### Smart Locator Strategies

**What are smart locators?** They're intelligent ways to find elements on a page that won't break when developers change the code. Instead of looking for technical details like CSS classes, smart locators find elements the way a human would - by their visible text, labels, or purpose.

Playwright recommends **user-facing attributes** over technical selectors:

1. **Semantic HTML & ARIA** - Finding buttons, inputs, headings by their role
2. **Visible text** - Finding elements by what users can see
3. **Test IDs** - Only as a last resort when semantic options aren't available

This approach makes tests more resilient to code changes.

---

## Decision Framework

**Choose Playwright if:**

- Your team has developers comfortable with code
- You need complex test scenarios with conditional logic
- Budget is limited (it's free and open-source)
- You want tests to run on your own computers/servers
- You need full control over test execution

At IOMETE, we chose Playwright because our engineering team could maintain it, and we needed complex test flows for our data platform that no-code tools are hard to manage.

**Choose No-Code Tools if:**

- Your QA team or product managers want to create tests without coding
- You need visual regression testing (comparing screenshots)
- You want minimal maintenance with AI-powered self-healing tests
- Quick test creation matters more than customization

Popular examples include [Reflect.run](https://reflect.run) and [BugBug.io](https://bugbug.io) - tools where you record your actions and they create tests automatically.

**IOMETE's Current Approach:**

We've fully migrated to Playwright for all our E2E tests. While we continuously evaluate no-code tools for potential future use, Playwright currently meets all our data platform testing needs with its flexibility and powerful features.

---

## Best Practices for Reducing Flakiness

**What is flakiness?**<br/>
It's when a test passes sometimes and fails other times without any code changes - like a light switch that works randomly. This is frustrating and reduces trust in your tests.

**1. Smart Waiting:**

Instead of waiting a fixed time (like "wait 5 seconds"), smart waiting means waiting for specific conditions (like "wait until the loading spinner disappears"). This makes tests faster and more reliable.

```javascript
// ❌ Bad
await page.waitForTimeout(5000);

// ✅ Good
await page.getByRole("progressbar").waitFor({ state: "hidden" });
```

**2. Stable Locators:**

**What are stable locators?**<br/> These are ways to find page elements that won't break when the design changes. Think of it like addressing a letter - using a person's name is more reliable than describing what they're wearing.

```javascript
// ❌ Bad - CSS classes change frequently
await page.click(".btn-primary-new-style");

// ✅ Better - Semantic HTML
await page.getByRole("button", { name: "Submit" }).click();

// ✅ Good - Label association
await page.getByLabel("Email Address").fill("test@example.com");

// ✅ Acceptable - Visible text
await page.getByText("Save Changes").click();

// ⚠️ Last resort - Test IDs
await page.getByTestId("complex-widget").click();
```

**3. Test Isolation:**

Each test should be completely independent - like separate experiments in a lab. This means:

- Tests don't depend on each other
- Each test creates its own test data
- If one test fails, others still run

This prevents a domino effect where one failure causes many tests to fail.

**4. Retry Configuration:**

Sometimes tests fail due to temporary issues (network glitches, slow servers). Retry configuration automatically re-runs failed tests before marking them as failures:

```javascript
export default {
  retries: 2, // Try up to 3 times total
  use: { trace: "on-first-retry" }, // Record what happened on retry
};
```

This filters out temporary issues from real bugs.

---

## Testing Metrics

| Metric         | Unit Tests   | API Tests    | Integration | E2E                 |
| -------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ----------- | ------------------- |
| Coverage       | 80-90%       | 70-80%       | 60-70%      | Critical paths only |
| Execution Time | < 5 min      | < 10 min     | < 15 min    | < 30 min            |
| Flakiness      | < 1%         | < 2%         | < 3%        | < 5%                |
| Run Frequency  | Every commit | Every commit | Every PR    | Nightly             |

**API Tests** verify that your backend services work correctly - testing the "brain" of your application without the UI.

---

## Key Takeaways from IOMETE's Testing Journey

- **Invest heavily** in Unit (70%) and API tests (20%) for stability
- **Keep E2E minimal** (10%) — focus only on critical user flows
- **Choose tools** that match your team's skills and maintenance capacity
- **Playwright works** for IOMETE's complex data platform, but we continuously evaluate no-code alternatives

### Recommended Test Distribution

- **Unit Testing:** ~70% – fastest, smallest scope
- **API Testing:** ~20% – verifies business logic & data integrity
- **E2E UI Testing:** ~10% – focused on critical user flows

<Img src="/img/blog/2025-08-29-cypress-vs-playwright-e2e-testing-guide/testing-pyramid-recommended.png" alt="Testing pyramid" maxWidth="700px" centered />

Commit message:

Revise E2E testing guide to include an overview of different testing types for better context and understanding

blog/2025-08-29-cypress-vs-playwright-e2e-testing-guide.md, after:

---
title: Cypress vs Playwright - E2E Testing Best Practices and Migration Guide
description: Complete guide to E2E testing with Cypress and Playwright. Learn smart locator strategies, reduce test flakiness, and choose between code-based vs no-code testing tools
tags2: [Educational, Technical]
coverImage: img/blog/thumbnails/3.png
authors: vugar
---

import Img from '@site/src/components/Img';

## Understanding Different Types of Testing

Before diving into E2E testing, let's understand the testing landscape:

- **Unit Tests**: Test individual functions or components in isolation (fastest, most focused)
- **API Tests**: Verify backend endpoints work correctly without the UI - testing the "brain" of your application
- **Integration Tests**: Check that different modules or services work together properly
- **E2E Tests**: Simulate complete user journeys through the entire application stack

### What is E2E Testing?

End-to-End (E2E) testing simulates **real user interactions** to verify that the entire system — frontend, backend, and integrations — works together as expected. For example, an E2E test might log in a user, submit a form, and confirm the result appears correctly.

**Key benefits:**

- **Early bug detection** - Fixing production bugs can be 100x more expensive than catching them during development
- **Code quality improvement** - Writing tests forces developers to think about edge cases and design better interfaces
- **Team confidence** - Comprehensive tests enable fearless refactoring and feature additions

### Example: Modern Login Test in Playwright

```javascript
// playwright-login.spec.js
test("User can login successfully", async ({ page }) => {
  await page.goto("https://app.example.com");

  // Smart locator strategies - semantic HTML and ARIA
  await page.getByLabel("Email").fill("user@example.com");
  await page.getByLabel("Password").fill("password123");
  await page.getByRole("button", { name: "Sign In" }).click();

  // Assert successful login
  await page.getByRole("heading", { name: "Dashboard" }).waitFor();
  await expect(page).toHaveURL(/.*dashboard/);
});
```

---

## Our Journey: Cypress → Playwright at IOMETE

In 2021, we at IOMETE (a modern data lakehouse platform) chose **Cypress** because it was the most popular E2E testing tool with great community support. However, as our platform's complexity grew, we migrated to **Playwright** for better browser support and stability:

**[Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/):**

- ✅ Easy setup, great debugging with time-travel feature
- ❌ Limited browser support (Chrome-family only, no Safari/WebKit)
- ❌ Parallelization requires paid Cypress Cloud or complex setup
- ❌ Tests run inside the browser (can't test multiple tabs/windows)
- ❌ No native mobile testing support

**[Playwright](https://playwright.dev/):**

- ✅ Full browser support (Chrome, Firefox, Safari)
- ✅ Parallel execution, faster CI/CD pipelines
- ✅ Open-source with video recording and trace viewer
- ✅ Smart locator strategies (role, label, text)
- ⚠️ Developer-only tool

**No-Code Alternatives:**

- ✅ AI-powered self-healing selectors
- ✅ Non-technical team members can contribute
- ❌ $200-500/month pricing
- ❌ Limited flexibility for complex scenarios (API mocking, conditional logic, database setup)

### Smart Locator Strategies

**What are smart locators?** They're intelligent ways to find elements on a page that won't break when developers change the code. Instead of looking for technical details like CSS classes, smart locators find elements the way a human would - by their visible text, labels, or purpose.

Playwright recommends **user-facing attributes** over technical selectors:

1. **Semantic HTML & ARIA** - Finding buttons, inputs, headings by their role
2. **Visible text** - Finding elements by what users can see
3. **Test IDs** - Only as a last resort when semantic options aren't available

This approach makes tests more resilient to code changes.

---

## Decision Framework

**Choose Playwright if:**

- Your team has developers comfortable with code
- You need complex test scenarios with conditional logic
- Budget is limited (it's free and open-source)
- You want tests to run on your own computers/servers
- You need full control over test execution

At IOMETE, we chose Playwright because our engineering team could maintain it, and we needed complex test flows for our data platform that no-code tools are hard to manage.

**Choose No-Code Tools if:**

- Your QA team or product managers want to create tests without coding
- You need visual regression testing (comparing screenshots)
- You want minimal maintenance with AI-powered self-healing tests
- Quick test creation matters more than customization

Popular examples include [Reflect.run](https://reflect.run) and [BugBug.io](https://bugbug.io) - tools where you record your actions and they create tests automatically.

**IOMETE's Current Approach:**

We've fully migrated to Playwright for all our E2E tests. While we continuously evaluate no-code tools for potential future use, Playwright currently meets all our data platform testing needs with its flexibility and powerful features.

---

## Best Practices for Reducing Flakiness

**What is flakiness?**<br/>
It's when a test passes sometimes and fails other times without any code changes - like a light switch that works randomly. This is frustrating and reduces trust in your tests.

**1. Smart Waiting:**

Instead of waiting a fixed time (like "wait 5 seconds"), smart waiting means waiting for specific conditions (like "wait until the loading spinner disappears"). This makes tests faster and more reliable.

```javascript
// ❌ Bad
await page.waitForTimeout(5000);

// ✅ Good
await page.getByRole("progressbar").waitFor({ state: "hidden" });
```

**2. Stable Locators:**

**What are stable locators?**<br/> These are ways to find page elements that won't break when the design changes. Think of it like addressing a letter - using a person's name is more reliable than describing what they're wearing.

```javascript
// ❌ Bad - CSS classes change frequently
await page.click(".btn-primary-new-style");

// ✅ Better - Semantic HTML
await page.getByRole("button", { name: "Submit" }).click();

// ✅ Good - Label association
await page.getByLabel("Email Address").fill("test@example.com");

// ✅ Acceptable - Visible text
await page.getByText("Save Changes").click();

// ⚠️ Last resort - Test IDs
await page.getByTestId("complex-widget").click();
```

**3. Test Isolation:**

Each test should be completely independent - like separate experiments in a lab. This means:

- Tests don't depend on each other
- Each test creates its own test data
- If one test fails, others still run

This prevents a domino effect where one failure causes many tests to fail.

**4. Retry Configuration:**

Sometimes tests fail due to temporary issues (network glitches, slow servers). Retry configuration automatically re-runs failed tests before marking them as failures:

```javascript
export default {
  retries: 2, // Try up to 3 times total
  use: { trace: "on-first-retry" }, // Record what happened on retry
};
```

This filters out temporary issues from real bugs.

---

## Testing Metrics

| Metric         | Unit Tests   | API Tests    | Integration | E2E                 |
| -------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ----------- | ------------------- |
| Coverage       | 80-90%       | 70-80%       | 60-70%      | Critical paths only |
| Execution Time | < 5 min      | < 10 min     | < 15 min    | < 30 min            |
| Flakiness      | < 1%         | < 2%         | < 3%        | < 5%                |
| Run Frequency  | Every commit | Every commit | Every PR    | Nightly             |


---

## Key Takeaways from IOMETE's Testing Journey

- **Invest heavily** in Unit (70%) and API tests (20%) for stability
- **Keep E2E minimal** (10%) — focus only on critical user flows
- **Choose tools** that match your team's skills and maintenance capacity
- **Playwright works** for IOMETE's complex data platform, but we continuously evaluate no-code alternatives

### Recommended Test Distribution

- **Unit Testing:** ~70% – fastest, smallest scope
- **API Testing:** ~20% – verifies business logic & data integrity
- **E2E UI Testing:** ~10% – focused on critical user flows

<Img src="/img/blog/2025-08-29-cypress-vs-playwright-e2e-testing-guide/testing-pyramid-recommended.png" alt="Testing pyramid" maxWidth="700px" centered />
